Numerical consistency of metric terms in terrain-following coordinates
Klemp, JB; Skamarock, WC; Fuhrer, O
MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW   131(7):1229-1239   Published: JUL 2003

In numerically integrating the equations of motion in
terrain-following coordinates, care must be taken in treating the
metric terms that arise due to the sloping coordinate surfaces. In
particular, metric terms that appear in the advection and
pressure-gradient operators should be represented in a manner such
that they exactly cancel when transformed back to Cartesian
coordinates. Noncancellation of these terms can lead to spurious
forcing at small scales on the numerical grid. This effect is
demonstrated for a mountain wave flow problem through analytic
solutions to the linear finite-difference equations. Further
confirmation is provided through numerical simulations with a
two-dimensional prototype version of the Weather Research and
Forecasting (WRF) model, and with the Canadian Mesoscale Compressible
Community (MC2) model.

1. Introduction
Terrain-following coordinates - truncation errors arise in computing the
horizontal pressure-gradient force in terrain-following
coordinates, particularly in the presence of steep terrain

distortion arises when the metric terms
in the coordinate transformation are computed using numerics
that are not consistent with the numerical
schemes used for other terms in the equations,

artificial contributions to the linear
wave solution that may be particularly significant for
terrain features that have horizontal length scales similar
to the Scorer parameter

2. Linear analytic mountain-wave solution

Remove reference pressure profile to reduce errors

3. Example linear solutions

4. Nonlinear numerical model simulations

5. Dependence on horizontal scale

6. Consistent metrics in a semi-Lagrangian model

7. Summary

An alternative approach for achieving accurate representation
of horizontal derivatives in terrain-following
coordinates is to avoid using the metrics by computing
the derivatives in physical space

Removing a reference profile from the
Lagrangian integration of the thermodynamic variable
may reduce the distortion caused by metric inconsistency
in the trajectory calculation if the reference profile
is close to the actual mean state; however, in many
nonlinear or real weather applications, deviations from
any specified reference state will be significant.
