RWEP07
Title: A new large-eddy simulation model for simulating air flow and warm clouds above highly complex terrain. Part I: The dry model
Author(s): Reinert, D; Wirth, V; Eichhorn, J; Panhans, WG
Source: BOUNDARY-LAYER METEOROLOGY 125109-132 Art No. 10.1007/s10546-007-9183-8|ISSN 0006-8314 2007
Times Cited: 0
Abstract: This paper presents the dry version of a new large-eddy simulation (LES) model, which is designed to simulate air flow and clouds above highly complex terrain. The model is three-dimensional and nonhydrostatic, and the governing equations are sound filtered by use of the anelastic approximation. A fractional step method is applied to solve the equations on a staggered Cartesian grid. Arbitrarily steep and complex orography can be accounted for through the method of viscous topography. The dynamical model core is validated by comparing the results for a spreading density current against a benchmark solution. The model accuracy is further assessed through the simulation of turbulent flow across a quasi two-dimensional ridge. The results are compared with wind-tunnel data. The method of viscous topography is not restricted to moderately sloped terrain. Compared to models using curvilinear grids, it allows this model to be applied to a much wider range of flows. This is illustrated through the simulation of an atmospheric boundary-layer flow over a surface mounted cube. The results show that the dry model version is able to accurately represent the complex flow in the vicinity of three-dimensional obstacles. It is concluded that the method of viscous topography was successfully implemented into a micrometeorological LES model. As will be shown in Part II, this allows the detailed study of clouds in highly complex terrain.

Viscous topography means that mountains are a fluid with very high viscosity

Fas03
Title: Forecasts of valley circulations using the terrain-following and step-mountain vertical coordinates in the Meso-Eta Model
Author(s): Fast, JD
Source: WEATHER AND FORECASTING 18 (6):1192-1206 2003
Times Cited: 1
Abstract:The nonhydrostatic version of the NCEP Meso-Eta Model is used to perform simulations that differ by only the vertical coordinate to determine the differences in forecasted valley circulations associated with the step-mountain and terrain-following vertical coordinates and whether one coordinate produces consistently superior forecasts at meso-gamma and micro-alpha scales. A horizontal grid spacing of 850 m is used. The model forecasts are evaluated using data from the October 2000 Vertical Transport and Mixing ( VTMX) field campaign in the Salt Lake valley. The forecasts of the diurnal evolution of the dominant circulations in the Salt Lake valley, including valley, slope, and canyon flows, and their modification by synoptic forcing during five intensive observation periods, were qualitatively similar to the measurements. Forecasts produced by the step-mountain and terrain-following vertical coordinates each have their own advantages and disadvantages and neither vertical coordinate outperformed the other overall. In general, the terrain-following coordinate simulations reproduced the observed surface wind directions over the valley sidewalls better, while the step-mountain coordinate simulations of nighttime near-surface temperatures and wind speeds were closer to the observations. Significant differences in wind speed and direction between the simulations were also produced in the middle valley atmosphere at night, with the terrain-following coordinate simulations somewhat better than the step-mountain coordinate simulations. Similar forecast errors produced by both simulations probably resulted from the physical parameterizations, rather than the choice of vertical coordinate.
ISSN: 0882-8156

KKS03
Title: Finite volume method on unstructured grids in 3D with applications to the simulation of gravity waves
Author(s): Klassen, L; Kroner, D; Schott, P
Source: METEOROLOGY AND ATMOSPHERIC PHYSICS 82 (1-4):259-270 Art No. 10.1007/s00703-001-0589-4|ISSN 0177-7971 2003
Times Cited: 1
Abstract:A code for the simulation of atmospheric flows in 3D is presented. The underlying mathematical model is fully compressible, it takes gravity into account but Coriolis forces, turbulence and viscosity are neglected. The general numerical code consists of a finite volume discretization on unstructured hexahedral grids in 3D. The code is presently being investigated on applications to the calculation of atmospheric gravity waves on a mesh which has a structured type and is locally refined near the orography. We develop two schemes, the main difference between them lies in the different discretizations for the mass fluxes. We show that both schemes resolve typical structures of gravity waves in potential flow, linear hydrostatic motion and nonlinear non-hydrostatic regime. We compare advantages and disadvantages of the developed schemes.

 locally refined near the orography (smooth grading)

QK03
Title: Nonhydrostatic atmospheric normal modes on beta-planes
Author(s): Qian, JH; Kasahara, A
Source: PURE AND APPLIED GEOPHYSICS 160 (7):1315-1358 2003
Times Cited: 3
Abstract:To facilitate the understanding of nonhydrostatic effect in global and regional nonhydrostatic models, the normal modes of a nonhydrostatic, stratified, and compressible atmosphere are studied using Cartesian coordinates on midlatitude and equatorial beta-planes. The dynamical equations without forcing and dissipation are linearized around the basic state at rest, and solved by using the method of separation of variables. An eigenvalue-eigenfunction problem is formulated, consisting of the horizontal and vertical structure equations with suitable boundary conditions. The wave frequency and the separation parameter, referred to as "equivalent height," appear in both the horizontal and vertical characteristic equations as a coupled problem, unlike the hydrostatic case. Therefore, the nonhydrostatic equivalent height depends not only on the vertical modal scale, as in the hydrostatic case, but also on the zonal and meridional modal scales. Numerical results on the dispersion relations are presented for an isothermal atmosphere. Three kinds of normal modes, namely acoustic, gravity, and Rossby modes, are solved and compared with the corresponding global solutions. Nonhydrostatic effects are studied in terms of normal modes in a wide range of wavelengths from small to planetary scales. It is demonstrated that Rossby modes are hardly affected by nonhydrostatic effects regardless of wavelengths. However, nonhydrostatic effects on gravity modes become significant for smaller horizontal and deeper vertical scales of motion. The equivalent height plays a particularly important role in evaluating nonhydrostatic effects of normal modes on the equatorial beta-plane, because the equivalent height appears in the scaling of meridional distance variable of the eigenfunctions. The implementation of nonhydrostatic normal mode analysis on high-resolution numerical modeling is also discussed.
ISSN: 0033-4553

SLF+02
Title: A new terrain-following vertical coordinate formulation for atmospheric prediction models
Author(s): Schar, C; Leuenberger, D; Fuhrer, O; Luthi, D; Girard, C
Source: MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW 130 (10):2459-2480 2002
Times Cited: 28
Abstract:Most numerical weather prediction models rely on a terrain-following coordinate framework. The computational mesh is thus characterized by inhomogeneities with scales determined by the underlying topography. Such inhomogeneities may affect the truncation error of numerical schemes. In this study, a new class of terrain-following coordinate systems for use in atmospheric prediction models is proposed. Unlike conventional systems, the new smooth level vertical (SLEVE) coordinate yields smooth coordinates at mid- and upper levels. The basic concept of the new coordinate is to employ a scale-dependent vertical decay of underlying terrain features. The decay rate is selected such that small-scale topographic variations decay much faster with height than their large-scale counterparts. This generalization implies a nonlocal coordinate transformation. The new coordinate is tested and compared against standard sigma and hybrid coordinate systems using an idealized advection test. It is demonstrated that the presence of coordinate transformations induces substantial truncation errors. These are critical for grid inhomogeneities with wavelengths smaller than approximately eight grid increments, and may overpower the regular-grid truncation error of the underlying finite-difference approximation. These results are confirmed by a theoretical analysis of the truncation error. In addition, the new coordinate is tested in idealized and real-case numerical experiments using a nonhydrostatic model. The simulations using the new coordinate yield a substantial reduction of small-scale noise in dynamical and thermodynamical model fields.
ISSN: 0027-0644

coordinate transformations induces substantial truncation errors

Bon00
Title:A semi-implicit semi-Lagrangian scheme using the height coordinate for a nonhydrostatic and fully elastic model of atmospheric flows
Author(s): Bonaventura, L
Source: JOURNAL OF COMPUTATIONAL PHYSICS 158 (2):186-213 2000
Times Cited: 13
Abstract: A semi-implicit, semi-lagrangian algorithm suitable for the simulation of the dry, adiabatic, nonhydrostatic atmospheric dynamics is introduced and analysed. Height is used as vertical coordinate, without the customary terrain following normalization, thus resulting in a stable, robust, and efficient numerical scheme which allows for applications to mesoscale flows over complex orography. Results of simulations in typical lee waves test cases are presented, which show good agreement with the corresponding analytical solutions. (C) 2000 Academic Press.
ISSN: 0021-9991

GK00
Title: Behavior of flow over step orography
Author(s): Gallus, WA; Klemp, JB
Source: MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW 128 (4):1153-1164 2000
Times Cited: 21
Abstract:A two-dimensional nonhydrostatic version of the NCEP regional Eta Model together with analytic theory are used to examine flow over isolated mountains in numerical simulations using a step-terrain vertical coordinate. Linear theory indicates that a singularity arises in the steady flow over the step corners for hydrostatic waves and that this discontinuity is independent of height. Analytic solutions for both hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic waves reveal a complex behavior that varies with both horizontal and vertical resolution. Witch of Agnessi experiments are performed with a 2D version of the Eta Model over a range of mountain half-widths. The simulations reveal that for inviscid flow over a mountain using the step-terrain coordinate, flow will not properly descend along the lee slope. Rather, the flow separates downstream of the mountain and creates a zone of artificially weak flow along the lee slope. This behavior arises due to artificial vorticity production at the corner of each step and can be remedied by altering the finite differencing;adjacent to the step to minimize spurious vorticity production. In numerical simulations with the step-terrain coordinate for narrow mountains where nonhydrostatic effects are important, the disturbances that arise at step corners may be of the same horizontal scale as those produced by the overall mountain, and the superposition of these disturbances may reasonably approximate the structure of the continuous mountain wave. For wider mountains, where perturbations are nearly hydrostatic, the disturbances above the step corners have horizontal scales that are much smaller than the overall scale of the mountain and appear as sharp spikes in the flow field. The deviations from the "classic" Witch of Agnesi solution are significant unless the vertical resolution is very small compared to the height of the mountain. In contrast, simulations with the terrain-following vertical coordinate produce accurate solutions provided the vertical grid interval is small compared to the vertical wavelength of the mountain waves (typically at least an order of magnitude larger than the mountain height).
ISSN: 0027-0644

Jua00
Title: The NCEP mesoscale spectral model: A revised version of the nonhydrostatic regional spectral model
Author(s): Juang, HMH
Source: MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW 128 (7):2329-2362 Part 2 2000
Times Cited: 13
Abstract:This paper illustrates a modified nonhydrostatic version of the National Centers for Environmental Prediction regional spectral model (RSM). This nonhydrostatic version of the RSM can simulate atmospheric motions of all scales, especially mesoscale. For simplicity, it is referred to in this paper as the mesoscale spectral model (MSM). The preliminary results of the previous version of the MSM have been published on the year of 1992, with coarse resolution in three dimensions and no model physics. A fine-resolution two-dimensional version has been tested on classical problems and published on the year of 1994. Instead of an externally determined hydrostatic coordinate as originally designed in 1992 MSM, the internally evolved hydrostatic coordinate as used in the RSM is implemented. This modification makes the MSM closer to the hydrostatic version in model structure and dynamics. Besides the hydrostatic perturbation, related to the external hydrostatic state as perturbation nesting, the nonhydrostatic perturbation related to the internally evolved hydrostatic state is introduced. The same model physics used in the RSM are used in the MSM without the hydrostatic assumption. The major numerical techniques used in the hydrostatic version are used in the MSM as well. They are spectral computation, fourth-order horizontal diffusion, time filter, and semi-implicit adjustment for perturbation. The hydrostatic state, interpolated from the hydrostatic global model, is used as the initial condition without initialization or data assimilation, and it can be integrated up to several days with reasonable predictions. Extended tests of thermal bubbles and mountain waves in very fine resolutions by this revised MSM showed its behavior to be the same as, but not superior to, those of the previous version. These results are compatible to other model results in the literature. Cases using real data with full model physics as used in the RSM show that the revised MSM has reasonable results and is superior to the previous version as compared with the RSM in a coarse horizontal grid resolution of about 50 km. Furthermore, it shows that it can be successfully nested into the hydrostatic global model at 10- to 20-fold differences in horizontal resolution with a small domain due to the well-behaved perturbation nesting over flat plains, coastal oceans, and steep mountains.
ISSN: 0027-0644

KQ00
Title: Normal modes of a global nonhydrostatic atmospheric model
Author(s): Kasahara, A; Qian, JH
Source: MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW 128 (10):3357-3375 2000
Times Cited: 7
Abstract:Anticipating use of a very high resolution global atmospheric model for numerical weather prediction in the future without a traditional hydrostatic assumption, this article describes a unified method to obtain the normal modes of a nonhydrostatic, compressible, and baroclinic global atmospheric model. A system of linearized equations is set up with respect to an atmosphere at rest. An eigenvalue-eigenfunction problem is formulated, consisting of horizontal and vertical structure equations with suitable boundary conditions. The wave frequency and the separation parameter,referred to as "equivalent height," appear in both the horizontal and vertical equations. Hence, these two equations must be solved as a coupled problem. Numerical results are presented for an isothermal atmosphere. Since the solutions of the horizontal structure equation can only be obtained numerically, the coupled problem is solved by an iteration method. In the primitive equation (hydrostatic) models, there are two kinds of normal modes: The first kind consists of eastward and westward propagating gravity-inertia oscillations, and the second kind consists of westward propagating rotational (Rossby-Haurwitz type) oscillations. In the nonhydrostatic model, there is an additional kind of eastward and westward propagating acoustic-inertia oscillations. The horizontal structures of the third kind are distinguished from those of the first kind by large differences in the equivalent height. The second kind is hardly affected by nonhydrostatic effects. In addition, there are so-called external inertia-gravity mode oscillations (Lamb waves), which propagate horizontally with almost constant speed of sound. Also, there are external rotational mode oscillations that correspond to equivalent barotropic planetary waves. Those two classes of oscillations are identical to those in the hydrostatic version of model. Nonhydrostatic effects on the first kind of oscillations become significant for smaller horizontal and deeper vertical scales of motion.
ISSN: 0027-0644

WDS08
Title: Finite element ocean circulation model based on triangular prismatic elements, with application in studying the effect of topography representation
Author(s): Wang, Q; Danilov, S; Schroter, J
Source: JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH-OCEANS 113 (C5): Art No. C05015 2008
Times Cited: 0
Abstract: Topographic steering of waves and currents is one of the most important issues of the general ocean circulation. Its representation in ocean models depends on the spatial discretization, which heavily influences the ocean circulation even on the global scale. Models capable of working on unstructured grids allow to represent topography and coastlines continuously and to refine mesh locally. Finite Element Ocean circulation Model (FEOM) belongs to this class of ocean general circulation models. Its discretization is based on unstructured triangular meshes on the surface and prismatic elements in the volume. The model uses continuous linear representation for the horizontal velocity, surface elevation, temperature and salinity, and solves the standard set of hydrostatic primitive equations. The method to stabilize the numerical pressure modes and the implementation of hybrid vertical grids are discussed. The model supports hybrid vertical grids including z and sigma grids and their combination within the same numerical kernel. A method for calculating pressure gradient forces is introduced to reduce pressure gradient errors on inclined computational surfaces. Its performance is assessed via numerical experiments. The influence of different vertical discretization is illustrated using a seamount configuration. The model is MPI parallelized and has the functionality required for ocean general circulation modeling. It can be used as an efficient and versatile numerical tool for regional and global oceanographic applications and climate studies.

LHG06
Title: Comparison of entrainment in overflows simulated by z-coordinate, isopycnal and non-hydrostatic models
Author(s): Legg, S; Hallberg, RW; Girton, JB
Source: OCEAN MODELLING 11 (1-2):69-97 Art No. 10.1016/j.ocemod.2004.11.006|ISSN 1463-5003 2006
Times Cited: 17
Abstract:A series of idealised numerical simulations of dense water flowing down a broad uniform slope are presented, employing both a z-coordinate model (the MIT general circulation model) and an isopycnal coordinate model (the Hallberg Isopycnal Model). Calculations are carried out at several different horizontal and vertical resolutions, and for a range of physical parameters. A subset of calculations are carried out at very high resolution using the non-hydrostatic variant of the MITgcm. In all calculations dense water descends the slope while entraining and mixing with ambient fluid. The dependence of entrainment, mixing and down-slope descent on resolution and vertical coordinate are assessed. At very coarse resolutions the z-coordinate model generates excessive spurious mixing, and dense water has difficulty descending the slope. However, at intermediate resolutions the mixing in the z-coordinate model is less than found in the high-resolution non-hydrostatic simulations, and dense water descends further down the slope. Isopycnal calculations show less resolution dependence, although entrainment and mixing are both reduced slightly at coarser resolution. At intermediate resolutions the z-coordinate and isopycnal models produce similar levels of mixing and entrainment. These results provide a benchmark against which future developments in overflow entrainment parameterizations in both z-coordinate and isopycnal models may be compared. (c) 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

ADK+03
Title:On vertical advection truncation errors in terrain-following numerical models: Comparison to a laboratory model for upwelling over submarine canyons
Author(s): Allen, SE; Dinniman, MS; Klinck, JM; Gorby, DD; Hewett, AJ; Hickey, BM
Source: JOURNAL OF GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH-OCEANS 108 (C1): Art No. 3003 2003
Times Cited: 9
Abstract: [1] Submarine canyons which indent the continental shelf are frequently regions of steep (up to 45degrees), three-dimensional topography. Recent observations have delineated the flow over several submarine canyons during 2-4 day long upwelling episodes. Thus upwelling episodes over submarine canyons provide an excellent flow regime for evaluating numerical and physical models. Here we compare a physical and numerical model simulation of an upwelling event over a simplified submarine canyon. The numerical model being evaluated is a version of the S-Coordinate Rutgers University Model (SCRUM). Careful matching between the models is necessary for a stringent comparison. Results show a poor comparison for the homogeneous case due to nonhydrostatic effects in the laboratory model. Results for the stratified case are better but show a systematic difference between the numerical results and laboratory results. This difference is shown not to be due to nonhydrostatic effects. Rather, the difference is due to truncation errors in the calculation of the vertical advection of density in the numerical model. The calculation is inaccurate due to the terrain-following coordinates combined with a strong vertical gradient in density, vertical shear in the horizontal velocity and topography with strong curvature.

BP97
Title:Hybridization between sigma- and z-co-ordinates for improving the internal pressure gradient calculation in marine models with steep bottom slopes
Author(s): Burchard, H; Petersen, O
Source: INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL FOR NUMERICAL METHODS IN FLUIDS 25 (9):1003-1023 1997
Times Cited: 11
Abstract: It is discussed in this paper how the pressure gradient error in general vertical co-ordinate models (in which the sigma-transformation is a special case) can be reduced by means of hybrid models. For a better understanding, the derivation of such a general vertical co-ordinate model from the Cartesian co-ordinate model is given. Two types of hybridization between sigma- and z-co-ordinate models, each using one parameter specifying the degree of hydridization, are presented: (i) the mixed layer transformation with a constant number of layers which are refined near the surface and (ii) the z/sigma-transformation which introduces steps near the bottom. In order to achieve good results with the models using other than sigma-co-ordinates, a profile-conserving momentum advection discretization is developed. The different co-ordinate transformations are tested with 2D barotropic and baroclinic flows over a topographic bump. Those models with nearly horizontal co-ordinate surfaces in the stratified area give the best correspondence with an isopycnal reference solution. (C) 1997 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
ISSN: 0271-2091

GBD05
Author(s): Girard, C; Benoit, R; Desgagne, M
Title: Finescale topography and the MC2 dynamics kernel
Source: MONTHLY WEATHER REVIEW, 133 (6): 1463-1477 JUN 2005
Abstract: The Canadian Mesoscale Compressible Community (MC2) model provided daily forecasts across the Alps at 3-km resolution during the Mesoscale Alpine Programme (MAP) field phase of 1999. Among the results of this endeavor, some have had an immediate impact on MC2 itself as it increasingly became evident that the model was spuriously too sensitive to finescale orographic forcing. The model solves the Euler equations of motion using a semi-implicit semi-Lagrangian scheme in an oblique terrain-following coordinate. To improve model behavior, typical approaches were tried at first. These included a generalization of the coordinate transformation to make the terrain influence decay much more quickly with height as well as the introduction of nonisothermal basic states to diminish the amplitude of numerical truncation errors. The concept of piecewise-constant finite elements was invoked to reduce coding arbitrariness. But it was later pointed out that the problem was very specific and due to a numerical inconsistency. The true height of model grid points is fixed and known in height-based coordinates. Nevertheless, it was discovered that for this semi-Lagrangian scheme to be consistent, the departure height is an unknown that must be obtained in the same manner as the other unknowns.
ISSN: 0027-0644